Poem: 'Toussaint Louverture', by Dinah Ball (English MS 414/37)

 

Cast a reflective glance athwart the flood
To that bold Isle where prowess and renown
Have urged their course through deluges of blood,
And snapped the Tyrant's yoke, and scorned his frown.

When Europe's unrelenting hand had swayed,
With scorpion rod, Domingo's land of slaves,
And Negro-vengeance had her deeds repaid
By massacres that died the circling waves,

Benignant Heaven, in mercy to the oppressed,
Nurtured a Hero of the jitty race,
This mighty soul with ample views possessed,
And stamped with moral dignity his face.

'Midst anarchy and war, with calm survey,
He traced a path to greatness and repose;
Laid[?] his deep counsels for a future day,
And watched the crisis of this Brethren's woes:

Then, as when a fierce Tornado's core of death
Has threatened every hope[?], in darkness driven,
And beaming beauty comes on morning breath,
The mild, assuaging Messenger of Heaven,

So dawning on despair, his plans desplayed
Sublimist views of morals, laws, defence;
While opposition vanished into shade,
And left him single in a scheme immense.

He seemed the Evagoras of modern fame:--
With Cyprian Capitol, renowned for bliss,
Had Cape Francois compared its envied name,
And stood the world's delight, as Salamis!

In virtue's eye beamed this prophetic ray!
It was too pure a soul that triumphed there,
For answering[?] beams across the flood to stray;
No Gallic policy such views could share.

New subjugation and the lash of pain
Vowed envious France: but, only art refined
Might hope concurrence in Toussaint to gain,
So firm, so true, so politic his mind.

He owned a Father's love, a father's care:--
Two sons, the growing objects of delight,
To Gallia's court had borne his ardent prayer
For literary, and for sacred light.

Eight years of absence hasten to their close,
Where, as they deem, a fleet to guard their coast,
Bears those to share their valiant Sire's repose,
Their mother's tenderness, their country's boast.

With flags of amity the Barks drew near:
At Port Dauphin is heard the friendly hail:
Yet ranged in sight embattled ranks appear,
And slaughtering blades the peaceful crowds assail!

Near Cape Francois the mooring transports lay
Troop lands on Troop, while Gallic thunders roar;
The strand is ? in a dread effray[?]
And rising flames within defend the shore.

The unsuspecting Chief, in toils of peace,
Is distant far; while, 'midst encroaching fire,
Coisnon obtains a passport and release,
To bear the anxious youths to greet their Sire.

They join:-- Let feeling's language paint the bliss,
(If bliss so pure can earthly phrase approve,)
The joy-- [?] tear[?], the soul pressed[?] kiss,
The speechless sympathies of meeting love.

Soon to their guide the grateful Chief draws near:--
"Preceptor of my sons, revered, beloved"--
With arms outstretched to embrace, & starting tear[?]
Toussaint exclaims:-- Coisnon draws back unmoved:--

And rises[?] abruptly, and with haughty air,
He speaks:-- "Armed with the Consul's[?] power,"
"At Cape Francois, demands the august Le Clerc
"Your prompt submission, and your army's flower

"These yielded, he bestows the Consul's praise
"Wealth, honor, office, or a calm retreat,
"All that a Nation's gratitude conveys,
All that ambition's highest views meet.

Refusal ventured, he defies the place,
And vows revenge implacable and deep,
Extermination of your name, and race,
And ruin that shall leave no eye to weep.

Those darling objects you so closely fold[?]
Must be resigned:-- I lead those to Le Clerc:--
A passport all conditional I hold;
That passport's faith betrayed you will not spare[?]."

Their mother's ardent eye, their whispered love,
Affection's dark and realising fears
The Hero's bosom and his features move,
And hold a moment's triumph in his tears.

Now, as from dream aroused, his piercing views,
Beneath the alluring snare, perceives the chain;
Valour and duty urge him to subdue,
To fall a Martyr, or a Prince to reign.

Coisnon he calls. "Bear then my sons from sight"--
(His front announces Deity within!)
True to my God, and to my Brethren's right,
I dare to suffer, but I scorn to sin."

The ? is awful. Grief's load[?] burst[?] succeeds:--
The mother clasps her sons in wild despair:--
Through weeping crowds Coisnon his victims lead:--
With hands upraised, the Father kneels in prayer.

And walk they forth defenseless[?] to their foes--
Lambs torn from shelter for the sacrifice?
Or round their guiltless heads do pinions chase
That, spreading soon, shall hear them to the skies?

Rowed from the shore, they traverse for the deep;
Till evening shades, the signals of the doom,
Find them embracing in their last, long sleep,
Beneath the engulphing billow, now their Tomb.

Great, though distressed, Toussaint's intrepid soul
Rallies men its energy sublime:
But, how shall truth and valour hold control
Betrayed by perfidy, and matched with crime?

More vile, more treacherous than death concealed
In reptile fang, the baseness of his foes
Intrudes, in silence, where his sorrows yield
To virtue's ready balm, serene repose:

A consecrated spot;-- for there he knelt
Each morn and eve, with his whose kindred mind
Had learned with his to trust, or ? melt
In grateful praise, as each want inclined.

Surprised with shackles in the midnight gloom,
To a far distant shore in secret borne,
From purjured tongues, he listens to his doom,
Tongues that fidelity and peace had sworn.

And has the Avenger heard the Hero's plaint
From Gallic Dungeon, watery, dark, and deep?
Yes--Heaven has burst upon the imprisoned Saint!
Yes--France on fields of blood has learned to weep!
 
When the dark story blots the record's page,
The sons of Gaul will blush his face to claim:
Toussaint's renown shall reach the latest age,
And marbles bear his venerated name.

Dinah Ball.

Poem: 'Reign of Terror', by James Everett, enclosed in a letter to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/186)

To Miss Mary Anne Read
Respected Friend
Your letter of Apl 4th, the date of which
makes me ashamed, should have received a much earlier reply
had it not been for the difficulty I found in fixing my mind
upon a subject, which has already received almost every species
of poetic embellishment, and has been presented to the public in such
a variety of forms. After adopting and discarding various topics, as
connected with the general question, the simple form of expression
which heads the following stanzas, occurred to me, and was the
germ from which every other thought proceeded. I could view
Slavery in no other light than that of one continued system
of oppression and terror, and therefore, have considered it in its
effects, as operating both on matter and mind - on man, in his
health and spirits - on man, as amenable to the civil law, and
as a professing christian - operating on every relation of life, whether
civil, domestic, or religious -- and its, tremendous results, in reference
to the just judgments of a sin-avenging God. In order to produce effect,
I have aimed more at strength than ease; and if I shall
have produced anything capable of imparting either satisfaction
to yourself or aid to the cause, it will be sufficient for me
to know, with the female in the gospel, that though I have
not done what I would, I have done what I could and
that little has been accepted. With christian regards to the
family,

I am
With the utmost Respect
Your Obedt Servant
James Everett
Manchester.
June 14th 1826
Reign of Terror
Away, away, for terror here
resurps an universal reign.
Away, like righteous Lot, in fear
Nor tarry those in all the plain.
Away, for through the Western Isles
Which sprang from occan's bed in smiles
damon stalks, and claims the whole
Like him who once to Edon stoll
And spread the blight of death.
His music is the victim's cry,
The shrivelling glance is in his eye,
Infection in his breath.
 
Talk not of joy, where slavery reigns.
Of brightning hopes midst "hope deferr'd,
The negro's joys are huny in chains
The negro's hopes are all interrd:
He sees the writing on the wall
In laws, enacted to enthral
And seems, in every drivers hand
To see, upon the desert sand
The lion's fatal pan
And in the voice of men of blood
To hear the voice that shakes the wood,
And holds the soul in awe
 
Foul Misery, like a blast from hell,
Hath forced throughout the soul its way
As mighty tempests when they swell
And toss on high the ocean spray
And every flood in maniac form
Becomes the plaything of the storm
Still driving onward, still the tide
Hath burst the vessels rampart side
Through which the torrents pour --
And pour like cataracts from the rocks
Tremendous as the earthquake's shocks,
While all her dungeons roar
 
The face which once was full and round
Where health sat smiling through the jet,
And eyes, still more expressive found
Are sunk, like suns, untimely set.
But deeper shadows than the skin
Like musts, from troubled thoughts within
Arise, to dim the joyous sight,
And fret away the frame of might,
without the power to flee
Those shadows -- sudden as a squall --
Flit o'er the face, and darken all
Like winds across the sea.
 
Lo, in the precincts of the court
where Justice only should preside
To blacks, for proof, will none resort
The white man's oath is ne'er denied
Though undefiled the negro's hands
In lifeless silence still he stands
His inward spirit shrieks unheard,
And needed like the wailing bird,
Upon some lonely tower
While Terror, from his lurid seat,
And withering as the lightnings heat,
Descends supreme in power
 
To slaves -- except the christian few
The Sabbath's holy calm is lost
And these, their weekly toil pursue
With minds, by human tempests tost.
Their boding thoughts, from various ills,
Like floods amidst the wildest hills
Which rage throughout the lengthen'd night.
Rush headlong from their fearful height,
and seek the stream that flows;
For, stooping from its dreary place,
The mind sweeps trough the means of grace,
Till fury finds repose
 
But oft, ere that repose is found
The men of Belial crowd the road
And dare to visit holy ground,
And stand among the sons of God:
Where damon art the balance holds
To weigh the truth the priest unfolds,
or basely -- and by civil test
Confound the freedom of the blest,
With freedom to the slave
And boldly charge that priest to flee,
Or try, with cruel mockery,
And doom him to the grave
 
The negro, branded at the mart
Pours forth in vain the rending sigh
A single bid will quail his heart,
And sever each domestic tie:
And where soe'er his feet ^shall roam,
His manhood ne'er will know a home!
No wife to sooth or raise his head.
No infant babes to cheer his shed
Or fan affections flame
His grave is distant and alone
The spot to wife and babes unknown,
-- No tablet for his name!
 
Not one of all the infant throng
That lies upon a mother's knee,
But gives to agony -- a tongue,
Unknown to children of the free,
Unknown to those, whose tears but flow
From transient fits of tiny woe,
And who, like troubled sea birds, cry
While passing through the stormy sky,
And then -- upon the wave --
As softly fall as gleams of light,
And float in beauty to the sight,
All fearless of a grave.
 
Ah, no! to babes in slavery born,
Few are the seas and skies serene,
All ruthless, from a mother torn,
Her weeping image still is seen;
Nor less her voice they seem to hear
In lingering tones on Memory's ear
Now echoing sweet -- now wildly roll
Through all the regions of the soul,
-- Then, soft -- and far away --
Like music on the midnight lake
Till, starting from the dream, they wake
To misery, a prey
 
Nor say, the mother cannot feel
At whom the poisoned dart is flung;--
The body owns the quivering steel
The tortured wild-cat loves her young:
And can she from her babes depart,
Whose life-strings twine around her heart, --
Those babes, whom nature e'er must own
As flesh of flesh and bone of bone,
And part without a pang?
O, no; -- employ the scourge, the knife,
And tear the limbs and threaten life,
On these she still must hang.
 
Away, away, for terror here
Usurps an universal reign,
Where parents, children, live in fear
And walk upon their kindred slain.
Away, -- for now those beauteous Isles,
With breath of balm and face of smiles,
-- which yet had man's Elysium been,
Had man himself not changed the scene,
Are threatened from above;
And judgment, though it linger long,
Will burst in wrath for Afric's wrong,
And now begins to move.
 
Away, -- for men of blood have piled
The fabric of their guilt so high
That dark, o'er Isles, which e'er had smiled,
It spreads its shadow to the eye.
Away, -- for Vengeance springs to birth,
And with the whirlwind sweeps the earth,
And bears, like autumn leaves away
The men of guilt, whose iron sway
Held innocence in chains.
Away, -- for down the fabric falls
The voice of blood for justice calls,
And God in Vengeance reigns.
 
James Everett.
Manchester
June 14th 1826
P.S. A line, noticing the reception
of the stanzas, will oblige.

Letter from Mary Howitt to Mary Anne Rawson, with the poem 'The West Indian Salesman' (English MS 414/27)

Nottingham June 16. 1833

My dear Mrs Rawson

Your letter did not reach me till some time after its date & I was then in London considerably occupied by many things which hardly left one time to reply to it properly, & beside this, as neither my husband nor myself had any available manuscripts with us, I could not make an answer to you from that plan as useful to you as I hoped to do when I returned You were quite eight about my having requested the two little poems from your hands -- I hoped at that time ? to improve them or to substitute something much better. & on looking ? ? our they seem of so indifferent a stamp that my authorly feeling of self-regard outweighs my goal to publicly come forward even in so good & noble a work as the one you advocate with nothing better than the two poor poems I esteem? you, not? in truth for their value but because they are your property & not mine.

You are also perhaps aware that the incident of the one entitled "The Negro Mother" has since mine was written, been made use of by "Charlotte Elizabeth" so that the originality of its character is gone -- & indeed if I might advise you I would recommend [?] of those I send being used for I doubt extremely their ability to do more than fill a certain number of pages.

Had my husband had any idea of you continuing your intention of publishing your little volume he would not have printed the poem you speak of. He would be most happy to aid you in your good undertaking & so should I most sincerely had we any thing by us which we could offer -- or had we ⟨were there now⟩ time before they were wanted -- but our absence from home & several things which made an imperative demand both on time & attention him out return have rendered it impossible. I however copy two stanzas on the other side rather? to show his good will than in any hope that they will be thought suitable seeing the work is edited by a lady.

I hope it is needless to say how sincere a sympathy both my husband & myself felt in the head ⟨sorrow⟩ which removed you from Nottingham but time & religion dear friend "being such wondrous easing" that this is among the many mercies [?][?] every tired Christian has to be thankful for. I have often enquired after your little daughter & have been glad to hear that she is such a one as to make a mother's heart rejoice.

I am dear Mrs Rawson
with great respect
yours truly

M. Howitt
The West Indian Salesman
An English gentleman in Kingstone craves
The price of a young tawny of fifteen,
Who stands for sale among a crowd of slaves,
A sight, thank God! their eyes have never seen.
The sum is named, but the shrewd longer waves
Awhile the bargain, & with careless mein,
says "had the lad but been but a right jet black, he
Would suit my taste much better as a lacky!"

"A black!["] retorts the seller "if you knew
What blacks are, you would take a wiser tone
Why sir, for sense & spirit, may for hue
He's a cut diamond to a Negro drone
and hark-a-look at me sir -- & then view
What he will make -- for the young dog's my own!"
"Your own! -- your son! & sell him? God on high
That I should go a Devil's brat[?] to buy!"

Untitled poem by Elizabeth Walker (English MS 415/134)


He hath sent me to heal the broken hearted
to preach deliverance to the Captives -- & recovering of light
to the blind to set at liberty them that bruised
to preach the acceptable year of the Lord -- Luke 4th chapter
18 & 19th verses
Lest! to that deep despairing groan, that frantic cry of woe!
Gaze on those looks of agony, those scalding tears that flow
flash! 'tis the clank of Slav'ry's chain, they forge each ? fast
One parting, hopeless look of love -- Ah! Captive, 'tis thy last!!
Now swiftly o'er the briny deep the fatal vessel flies,
No light of day, no breath of Heav'n, to mingle with their sighs
Unheeded flow those bitter tears, e'en Pity[?] weeps in vain
Alas! the depth of human woe -- they ne er will smile again!
Thro' years of piercing agony, we hear the sad low moan
or cutting last, or cruel scourge ??? the deeper groan
Then mem'ry pictures home, & wife. Ah! can he e'er forget?
His children too, can they be slaves? More bitter anguish yet?
Towards Heav'n the clasped hands are raised the woe[?] worn ? eye
God pity Thee!! poor suff'ring one! from Man no aid is nigh
Yet cheer, oh cheer thee hapless Slave -- thy Tyrants ? is o'er
Thou'st hast'ning to that happy Land, where He can set[?] no more
Th' indignant heart has burst in twain -- its last warm streaming-
blood
Appeals from mans base treachery -- to a heart searching[?] God!
Thou Lord! hast heard the Captives prayers, hast set his Spirit
free
Captive, but in the bonds of love, he dwells in bliss with thee!!
How rouse[?] thee Albions! ah how long has been thy dreamy
sleep --
Shall Africs children still be Slaves "still drag those chains
& weep."
Britons!! oh Liberty is yours oh Liberty you prize --
Then claim it, for you fetterd Slave, who now in anguish
lies --
A Light, the star of Hope & Joy, has o'er th' Atlantic shone
Shall it be quench'd in deeper night -- shall Hope's bright
gleam be gone?
Ah! no! let ev'ry heart respond -- be firm, press on & prove
What British hands & hearts can do, when sway'd by
Christian love!!
_______
Elizabeth
_______
she hath done what she could! --
April 3rd 1933 --

Poem: 'The Planter's Last Hour', by Sarah J. Williams (English MS 415/125)

The Planter's Last Hour
I saw a chamber in th' abode of pride,
With all of rest that could be bought with gold;
Where was a bed of down, high canopied,
And curtained round with damask's crimson fold.
The windows were deep veil'd, and yet a ray --
A single ray of the sweet sunshine ^sunlight shone
Thro' the dim room, and on that couch did play,
And on the face of him who laid thereon,
But he was dying -- O there was a look
On his white lips which moved convulsively,
And all his features quivered, and he shook
As if a vision met his glazing eye.
The hireling nurse was there, and serving men
Waited his bidding; yet he was alone,
Lone, for their hearts were not with him, & when
He spoke how deep and hollow was the tone
That would so soon be silent! yet tho' then
The gurgling sound of death was in his throat,
She lifted his faint voice yet once again;
It needed not a bended ear to note
His accents midst that silence most profound,
For each and every word the hush that broke
Was horribly distinct, as if it's sound
Would fain be heard for ever; thus he spoke,
"I stood within a crowded mart, I bought
"That which was there exposed for sale, which gold
"Of course made justly mine; it mattered nought
"What were the creatures that were bought and sold;
"They were but chattels. Did I treat them well,
"Or ill, or what of food and rest I gave? --
"Is that all ye would ask, or I should tell?
"Why was one tyrant and the other slave?"
"Had I the right to vest me with a power
"Unlimited, to deal out misery,
"To trust mine own frail nature with a dower
"Of such momentous import, or was I
"Free to impress my name upon his brow,
"To bend his will beneath my iron rod?
"That is the question, and that question now
"He was to me but as my dog, my steed,
"But as the tool with which I wrote his doom;
"But now he turns and asks me of that deed,
"He looks up to me from his early tomb,
"And with a face so human -- and a voice,
"A Brother's voice, even like his, who played
"With me in childhood, where free birds rejoice,
"And tinkling rills flow by near the chestnut shade.
"And hark! I hear his heart throb like my own,
"I see the life-blood rushing thro' his veins,
"Quickened by feelings I did long disown
"Or kept in foul[?]^vile subjection by my chains.
"E'en as my soul is his, that truth I find
"Now that all hath lies naked to ^my view,
"I bought him; could I tell the thing had mind?
"Immortal mind, and did I buy that too?["]
The pallidness of death came o'er his clay
He ceased -- and pressed his eye-lids close as tho'
That slave with his fixed gaze did still essay
To look upon his heart and its last throe,
His mouth grew rigid -- The expression flung
Around his unclosed lips showed he had tried
To answer to some quest, but that his tongue
Stiffened ere utterance came; -- and thus he died.
But still that clear bright gleam of sunshine ^caught
His dark brow pillowèd in silence then,
What did it there, but to betray the thought
Of him, the man who trafficèd in men.
S J Williams
Mansfield March 27th
Madam
I returned home a few days ago, after
a long absense and found a letter from Miss
H Horker[?] requesting I would contribute something
to a volume you intended publishing on "Slavery"
I have my heart so much in the cause that it would give
me great pleasure to afford any assistance in my power to
such a work, I only fear that so much time having
elapsed (as Miss H wrote on the 3d instant) it may be too
late to do so. I had no unpublished piece on the subject
by me, but have written the enclosed on purpose for
you and shall be glad if it answers your purpose.
If you should wish any thing further from my pen
have the goodness to direct to me at Rev J Williams
Mansfield
I am yours respectfully
S J Williams

Poem: 'The Slave's Last Hour', by Sarah J. Williams (English MS 415/126)

The Slave's Last Hour.
I saw a spot in India's burning clime.
Thereon the shadow of a tree did fall
With grateful shelter. It was evening time.
The hour of rest was coming fast, with all
The stillness and "the beauty of repose"
Which Nature grants unto the meanest thing
That seeketh slumber at the long day's close.
A weary slave his feeble form did fling
Down on that green, cool sod, to wait for death.
There was a calm upon his brow as tho'
His spirit then had done with all beneath,
Had suffered his^its last pang of mortal woe.
As yet the deep-toned gong, or crackling scourge.
Had told not that the day of work was done,
And sunded[?] but the drooping slaves to urge.
To further toil, far from that dying one.
No hand was near to close his failing eye,
No human voice to speak one parting word;
Yet did the breeze of Heaven pass gently by
And tuneful sounds from the deep glen were ^heard
Yet was he not forsaken, nor alone
In that brief hour, life's sweetest and its last;
For his low whispers told his thoughts were gone
Back to the regions of the shadowy past.
If memory[?] aroused her powers to show
In one dark, dread review his all of life,
It was but that his parties soul might know
The loveliness of peace, from that long strife
If she returned once more the crowded mart,
And all his spirit in that scene had born
The hammer's fall that severed heart, from heart,
The jest, the laugh, the contumely, the seven
If she recalled again his mother's tears
Leaving her children for the long, long day,
And he who soothed awhile his early years,
Children who might not then his care repay.
'Twas that his spirit might ascend above
In warmer thankfulness that time was o'er,
And feel in all the strength of blighted love
How much Eternity might soon restore.
(So Where is the man who bears not in his heart
Some hope of future life beyond the tomb;
Of meetings where the loved shall never part
Of a long rest, and an eternal home?)
'Twas thus he spake. "Mother 'tis nightfall now,
Hush thy last child once more unto his rest.
"Young partner of my griefs: why weepest thou,
"Are not one children safe upon thy breast?
"Seest thou the tyrant? he who shed our blood
"In reckless vengeance. Aye we now may brook
"Unmoved his frown, who hath so often stood
"Unmoved upon our agonies to look.
"If it be true as some have dared to say,
"That Christ will render unto each his due,
"Vainly may he regret in that last day
"Deeds which Eternity can not undo.
Faintly upon the ear those last words came,
Meekly his dim eyes closed, and then he smiled
And grasped a few dead leaves. Then he became
Silent again, and quiet as a child,
A little child that sleeps the happy sleep
Of innocence upon its Mother's breast.
She damp earth was his pillow, but to deep
Was his soul's rest ^peace for aught to break his rest.
The shades grew darker round that lonely spot,
The wind blew chilly from that woody glen,
It mattered naught. Nature had harmed him not
And he was then beyond the reach of men.
S J W
Mansfield May 11th 1833
Dear Madam
I have been practically engaged in
the service of the Slaves, by assisting some other ladies
to obtain signatures to a petition in their behalf and this
with an attack of influenza has prevented my attending
sooner to your friendly communication. As you
mentioned that your work would not be completed in
less than a fortnight, I ventured to delay my reply till
I can't prepare another poem. If you can conveniently
place it immediately after "The Planter's Last Hour"
I hope it ^will show something of a contrast.
Considering the religious disadvantages under which the
slaves labour I did not think it would be proper to repress[?]
one of them as having a confirmed expectation of the first
appearance of our Lord to judge mankind.
With regard to the alteration you suggested in the
other poem I think the one line might be written
"His dark brow pillowed in deep silence then"
If you think that would be an improvement.
My rebellions Muse will not suggest any syllable
that could be inserted in the last line without consider
ably weakening it. I hope if trafficèd be printed with the long
accent over the e it will not be mistaken. Perhaps as
both cannot be altered you will think it better neither
should. I am not sure whether it would be correct to have
words so near to each other, one rendered two syllables and the
the other three, but this I will leave to your judgement.
I should have been glad if I could have altered both lines.
I am afraid you will observe many corrections, for I
am so ill as only to be able to copy a few versus of a line
from the rough manuscript which none but myself
can dicipher. I have only to add, that if at any time
I can lend a similar assistance to any of your benevolent
design I shall be happy to be called upon.
I remain Dear Madam
Yours respectfully
S. J. Williams
Perhaps it will be needful to put a note connected with the
word "scourge" I should have liked a word that would have
expressed the sound better than "crackling".
--------
* The Slaves on the Plantations are summoned to their work
by the sounding of the gong on the cracking of the whip whose
last[?] is said to resemble the firing of a pistol.  These[?] are sometimes
meant[?] to announce the time of meals or of retiring
[written crosswise:] Monday[?]. I had hoped to have been able to day to write a
clearer copy, but finding myself worse rather than better 
I can only hope you will be able to read this.

Letter from Jeremiah Holmes Wiffen to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/33)

Froxfield, near Woburn, 12th month 9th, 1833
 
I now transmit the contribution which I last week
gave thee reason to expect, and which if it meets thy approval, I shall be happy.
I designd it for the close of the volume, perhaps for the concluding piece;
but of this thou will be the best judge. If there are any that refer to
the future prospects of the Negro, now that the emancipation-bill is past,
with a more ardent feeling exultation, they might perhaps start up the
book better - but I could not but express somewhat [?] our disappointment
on providing[?] such low ground taken by those who carried the bill through Parliament
in the arguying of the great question; and the base tone of policy, and interest that
was perpetually used and pleaded there.--

I shall deem it an honour to have a proof sent for my revision by the pinter when set
up in type; which I will take care not to detain more than one post. I
shall be very glad to see the little Volume make its appearance, and I
do not doubt that thy benevolent intention of thereby prolonging the
sympathy that has so justly been excited for the Slave, will be realised
I have busied my thoughts a little upon a Title, but I do not know that I
have succeeded in suggesting a suitable one. It should be sensible & yet [?]ing,
if it is to refer to be Past as well as Future, it must almost necessarily
be a little fanciful--but I would not have it too recondite. I subjoin what
here occurred to me: and in the hope that they may strike us something or
other that may be judged appropriate, I remain with much esteem,
in which my wife unites.

yours very faithfully
J. H. Wiffen

My Brother, I am sorry to say finds it impossible to write anything.

1. Rights and Wrongs;
or,
The Negro's Album.
A collection of original contributions
in Prose and Verse, &.
Edited by M. A. Rawson.

2. The Rainbow in the Cloud;
a collection of original pieces
upon
Negro Slavery.
-
-

3. the Star after the a Storm;
a collection of original pieces
in Prose and Verse
on
Negro Slavery and Emancipation.
-
-

Was man ordained the slave of men to toil,
Yoked with the brutes, and fettered to the soil,
Weighed with a tyrant's balance with his gold?--
No! Nature stamped us in a heavenly mold!
She bade no wretch his thankless labour urge,
Nor, trembling, take the pittance and the scourge!
Campbell

London

Printed for -------

1834 & It should be dated the new year

Letter from John Bowring to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/45)

 

London 11th July 1834
Dear Miss Rawson

I ought before to have thanked you
for your very pretty little volume. I [?]
the poor part I took in its production had
flitted away from my mind and memory
but it is very delightful to find that
minds and memories better than mine
have been occupied with topics which (to
my shame be it spoken) I had almost forgotten
the topics? -- No[?] -- but my small participation
in labours so generous? devoted and useful
as yours.

 
Mrs. Bowring is engaged in the most pain-
ful and percmptory of duties -- She is closing
the eyes of her dying mother -- otherwise I am
sure she would have charged me with a
mission of kind remembrances


Most faithfully and ever yours
John Bowring

Letter from Thomas Fowell Buxton to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/116)

 

Northrepps Hall Cromer
Dear Madam

Your letter followed me in an
absence from home which had delayed
my answering it until now. I hope
therefore you have proceeded without
waiting for me & that I shall soon
have the pleasure of seeing your little
Work in Print. -- X As to me, the fact
is I have talked written & thought
on the subject of Slavery till I can
talk & write no longer. A mighty
work is accomplished as far as this
Country is concerned. A mighty
effect remains to be produced on
the other side of the Atlantic. ^We[?] [???]How many in England will
wait & watch the Result with
intense anxiety & interest! I only
hope they will not forget how much
they may contribute to its perfect
success -- The more I hear & read
the more I am convinced that the
Negro Race are blessed with rather
a peculiar aptitude for the
reception of moral & religious Instruc[-]
tion, and it does seem to me that
there never[?] was a stronger call on
any nation than there is now on
us to meet this inclination in
them, to supply them amply
with the means of Instruction
to [deleted word?] dispath Missionaries; to institute
Schools & to send out Bibles --
this is the only Compensation more
Power. & it is an abundant one! [deletion]
We may in this manner recompense
all the sorrows & sufferings we have
inflicted & be the means of making
in the End, their barbarous Removal
from their own [deleted word] Land. The
greatest of blessings to them. My
I am cheered indeed by hearing
the note of Preparation on many
sides. Various Denominations of
Dissenters are preparing the
Emissaries. The Church I trust
will not be behind & the service[?]
Wilberforce Subscription which after
the Erection of a monument is to
be applied to some the foundation
of some Institution in the West Indies
which shall be a more appropriate
Monument ^to Him than Marble, will
trust be widely patronized X
If -- dear Madam you can
condescend to print into your Work
as an extract from a letter the
Paragraph I have placed between
crosses, you are of course at
liberty. It is little worth while,
but I am too much occupied to
write a more formal Contribution

I am Yr faithful Servt
T. F. Buxton

I am far from wishing or
advising you to insert it ----
[addressed:]
Cromer Oct Six --
1833
Mrs. W. B. Rawson
Jos. Read's Esq.
Wincobank Hall
Sheffield
T. F. Buxton

Letter from Thomas Clarkson to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/155)

Playford Hall
April 15 1833

Madam
Your letter appears to have been written a month ago,
but for some cause or other it did not reach me till beg[?] a
long time after its date, & at the time I received it & indeed
up to the present moment my thoughts have been deeply engaged  
upon what I may call our common subject. This is one reason  
why I did not notice your letter sooner; and another is that  
having unhappily Cataracts on both my eyes I have not been  
able to see either to read or to write for some time, and this  
circumstance makes me aoord correspondence as mach as possible  
With respect to the publication of your volume of Poems, no person  
wishes it more success than I do, because no person can feel  
himself more interested in the cause, which it is intended to  
promote; indeed, I think that a work of this description may  
secure the attention of some, whom prose-compositions would not  
so much lay hold of & thus a greater number of persons may  
become acquainted with the case of the unhappy people whose  
rights we advocate. I am sorry that I am so situated as  
not to be able to contribute some little morceau towards  
your Book. But these little things are so foreign to my  
habits of composition, that I know I should not be able to  
satisfy myself & therefore must by you to excuse me.

I am obliged to you for your wish that I may live[?]  
to record the total abolition of Slavery. This would be most  
delighlfull, but I have no expectation of it. I may, however  
probably live to see the monster Slavery receive its death  
wound from the British Parliament. This will satisfy me  
and I shall be most truly & reverently thankful for it--

I am Madam yours very truly
Thomas Clarkson

Letter from John Clare to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/158)



Helpstone near Market Deeping
Northamptonshire
July 10. 1826
My dear Madam
 
I feel realy ashamed to write to
you to tell you of my willingness to write a trifle for your
work after this long delay to do so for it seems to
contradict the assertion after I have said it yet the
cause of the delay was my attempting to send something
with the letter but I have not felt satisfied with what
I have as yet done &amp; I feel it nesesary for good
manners sake to write to you without it to tell you
that I am anxious to do something &amp; most assuredly will
wether it be good bad or indifferent the attempt will
be the same -– I am sure Slavery is an abominable
traffic &amp; a disgrace to Mehomedism or much more
Christianity &amp; they who sanction it cannot be
Christians for it is utterly at variance with religion
&amp; nature -- I should have liked to have had all the
time I can to write a Trifle in as I am very ill at
a proposed subject & scarcely or ever succeed as I could wish
will a month or 5 weeks be soon enough I think a
few verses in the shape of a song on the "Negroe Boy"
would perhaps do if I can treat the matter as it should
be at least I will try & if you want it directly I must
trouble you if you please to write again to tell me so
if not I shall take my own time as above said I have
never heard of the Work you mention as I am but
seldom applied to for such matters in fact I live in such
an unknown corner of the Country that a letter hardly
finds out the way to me unless directed as above &
then there is often some difficulty but I hope this will
find you to assure you that I am ever anxious to assist
in every laudable endeavour as far as my humble
abilitys will permit me & that I am


My dear Madam
yours very respectfully
John Clare


Letter from Thomas Babington Macaulay to George Rawson (English MS 415/159)


London April 6. 1833

My dear Sir,

I should be most
truly glad to comply with
any request of yours. But
I really am so much occupied,
or rather overwhelmed by
business of different kinds
that it will, I fear, be quite
out of my power to
write any thing you your
friend's collection. I have
no fragment by me which
would be of the least use
to her.

I am truly glad to hear that
your cough has departed
and that you have
had so long and so quiet a
holiday. What do you
think of Sir Andrew Agnew's
Lord's Day Bill? The Lord's Day Bill... And
what does Mrs Rawson think
of it? We had an argument
on the subject, I remember,
at Hanover Square. I am
favorable to temperate legislation
on the subject. But this
measure seems to have
been framed by persons very
much of the temper of
those who forbade the
disciples to rub the
ears of corn in their
hands.  Allusion to Luke 6.1: 'And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.'

Remember me kindly to all
your family, and believe
me ever,

My dear Sir
Yours most truly
Th Macaulay

Letter from Ralph Wardlaw to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/160)



Edinburgh March 20th, 1834.
My Dear Madam

I am sorry that the apology you
so kindly meant for me is one which I cannot
plead -- namely that your first letter might possibly
not have reached me. At the same time, it would
be impossible for me, after so long an interval
to give any distinct account of the circumstances
which, at the period of its reception, prevented me from
answering it, I have most assuredly been very ungal-
lant; and, considering the nature and object of the
request it contained, in other respects culpable[?].
Your second letter reached me at Glasgow on the
afternoon of this day [?]; and next morn-
ing I came off for Edinr. where I now write.
A press of engagements prevented me from getting any
thing said in reply before leaving home; and since
coming in here, I have been tossed about incessant-
ly. I am tho more concerned at this, because, after
all I am constrained to answer you in terms that
will not be to your mind, -- that is, in terms of ne-
gation. I should not only be seriously[?] anxious to
gratify you; I should count it, moreover, a high
honour to have my name associated with the names
of those eminent and excellent friends of religion
and humanity, whom you mention; and an hon-
our still higher to appear in permanent associa-
tion with the Cause, equally glorious for its piety
and its benevolence, in which they have so nobly
and through the divine blessing, so successfully
co-operated. I rejoice in having been, even in how-
ever feeble a manner, employed in the work of ?
pecation?, -- in pulling down the prison-house, and
striking off the fetters of the bondmen; -- and few
things could afford me a higher gratification than
to put a stone into the Monument which you are
engaged in erecting upon its ruins, to tell posterity
where it stood, the curses it contained, and how
it fell. But it must not be. The time is alrea-
dy gone, which your last letter allowed me; and
my hands are now, and must be for some time
to come, quite full. I might explain how; but
it might wear the aspect of affectation, and is un-
necessary. The hands you inumerall are more than
sufficient to present to the view of posterity an ex-
quisite piece of masonry, -- a structure, in moral
& literary architecture, amply worthy of the great
occasion. ----

I have only now once more to offer my apolo-
gies, lame as I feel them to be, for my former long
silence, and to ask your forgiveness. ----
Mrs. W. who is here with me, unites[?] in kindest
regards to youself & to the members of both the fa-
milies with which you stand connected. -- We are
just going down to Leith, and intend leaving for
home to morrow morning. -- We thank you for
your kind regrets as to our not seeing you when in
your neighbourhood; we join in reciprocating those
regrets, and hope to be more fortunate next time.


Believe me to be, My Dear Madam
Yours with esteem & affection

Ralph Wardlaw

Letter from Thomas Moore to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/161)

Sloperton Cottage
March 24 1826.

Madam
You do me but justice in supposing that I
feel deeply interested in the cause for which you are so laudably
exerting yourself; & it gives he great pain to be obliged, from the
peculiar circumstances in which I am placed, to withhold the ^sort of asis=
tance which you do me the honour to think should afford you. Being
exposed to a variety of applications of this kind (though for far less
interesting purposes) I have been obliged to adopt a general resolution
not & contribute to any work of the nature of yours, whatever. In pursu=
ance of this determination I was compelled, some time ago, to refuse the
request of Dr. Montgomery that I would write something for his work in
aid of the Chimney Sweepers -- a work, which both from my admiration
of the Editor's genius, and my interest in the benevolent object he had in
view, I should have been most happy to assist to the utmost of my power.
This will, I trust, be a sufficient apology for the necessity which
I find myself under of adopting the same conduct with respect to you.

I have the honour to be your much
obliged Servant
Thomas Moore

Letter from George Thompson to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/162)

 


Canning Place Glasgow
Feb 25. 1833
My dear Madam,
 
The communication you did me the
honour to address to me at 18 Aldermanbury
did not reach me till this morning.
This delay must be my apology for
a silence what you perhaps have
censured, but will now forgive.
It affords me much pleasure to
find that you contemplate the pub-
lication of a volume which I doubt
not will be highly interesting to every
sincere ^friend of the Abolition of Slavery.
I much fear whether any thing which
I can contribute will be worthy a
place among its pages, but I cannot
refuse to comply with a request
which will confer upon me so high an
honour as that of being [unclear] with
the names you have mentioned: I will
therefore in a few days forward you
a prose contribution.

It will afford we much satisfaction
to aid the circulation of the work
when published, and if you would allow
me to offer a suggestion, I would say, the
sooner it appears the better.

I feel greatly obliged by your very
kind invitation to visit Wincobank should
I again be in the neighbourhood of Sheffield.
I am sorry the pleasure was precluded
when last near you.

I have now been upwards of a fortnight
in Scotland and have held Six Meetings[?]
in Glasgow. Three of them were called
for the purpose of debating hour by hour
the merits of the question with Borthwick
the Advocate of the West Indians.

The last discussion took place last
Thursday evening when the question was
decided by a shew of hands. For gradual
emancipation as recommended by the
[new?] Slavery [party?] about 150 or 200 appeared
for Immediate emancipation as set forth
by our Society 2400 appeared. This result
was obtained notwithstanding the most
strenuous efforts made by the opposite
party to procure a contrary decision[.]

With Kindest regards to Mr. & Mrs. Read
and every other member of your
much respected family, believe
me Dear Madam

With high esteem
Your Very Humble & Devoted St
G. Thompson
Mrs. M. A. Rawson


Letter from Isaac Taylor to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/164)


Stanford Rivers
May 15. 1826
Madam --
I am grieved
and ashamed to find that
I have so long delayed to reply
to the letter with which you
honoured me some weeks
ago. The pressure of many
engagements, merely, would not
have occasioned this delay
but I have really felt reluctant
to confess myself unable to
take part in promoting your
benevolent design -- and yet
at last I must make this con-
fession -- Poetry and fiction
are quite beyond my sphere
nor can I imagine that any such
essay as it would be possible for
me to furnish -- however well
intended it might be, would
either suit the company in
which it must appear or at all
subserve the great cause you
propose to advocate.
It remains ^for me therefore only
to offer my sincere and hearty
wishes for the success of your
humane and christian-like
endeavours and, though
unknown, to [unclear] myself
with sympathy and respect


Your obedient servant
I. Taylor [unclear]


Letter from Thomas Campbell to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/182)

10 Seymour St West, 8th May 1826

Madam
I have to express my regret to you for not having
answer'd your first letter & in answer to your second I
am sorry that I can only candidly say that my time is
compleatly ingross'd with literary business -- one beyond what
my health can well stand, & that is quite out of my
power to lend my cooperation to any other publication.

I remain
with respect--
Your obedt Servt
T. Campbell --


Letter from Thomas Raffles to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/188)


Liverpool, June 16th 1826.

My dear Miss Read
I cannot express to you how
much pain I feel in the long delay
which has attended the acknowledgement
of your most interesting letter of
the March last. Not a day has
passed, I can truly assure you...
without serious?, & I may say, anxious
thoughts respecting the important
subject to which it refers - and
delayed from day to day to
write in the hope that tomorrow, and
tomorrow, would yield me the leisure
and what was still more to the
purpose, the cue, for the trifling
service you was so good as to seek
at my hands -- but no such tomorrow
has yet arrived. I have tried
but I can accomplish nothing
I did indeed once string couplets
and do now & then put a few rhymes
together still but then, I have
never sought them -- they have
come unasked, and unexpected
& now that I [deleted word]? have earnestly
desired them -– they refuse to obey
my call -- & every effort has
utterly failed. And this is the state
of mind in reference to your request
in which I have been for the
last two months -- Ashamed of my
delay -- yet reluitant to write to
tell you, what I have been
compelled to disclose after all
& what, it I had told sooner, I
should have communicated, though
not with less regret, yet certainly
with an easier conscience
the same circumstances which
have caused the delay in this com-
munication to you, have also oper-
ated to keep me from Mr Roscoe, as
least in a great degree -- though
till lately the pressure of business
when him, relating to the subject
of slavery which has of recently
been much agaitated here, to get
with a consideration of
his infirmities & [?]
indisposition, has induced
him to regard an application to
him as unsuitable. I But
independently of these things, I
could not but think I should go
to him with a poor[?] face, to ask[?]
his help when as yet I had done
nothing my self. I will however,
apply to him, now -- And if he
should comply, and it should
unhappily be too late, his verses
may adorn a second edition of your
work.

And now, my dear friend, can you
forgive me. I have no alternative
but to call[?] my self upon your kindness
I have told you honestly the truth how-
ever much you may be disposed, to
censure me, exonerate me & entreat[?}
you[?] from the charge of wilful neglect
or indifference -- the subject is one
in which, I, in common with every man
worthy of the name of man, must be
deeply interested -- and if I could write
about it as I feel, you wd. have [?]
that breathe towards that [?]. Mrs. R
am sorry to say is very delicate still in
her health -- I am this day setting off

[crosswritten on the opening page:]

for London -- & thence to H[?].

With kindest
and most respectful regards to your most excellent
family, in which
Mrs. R. unites, I
am most truly
Yr. obliged friend
Th. Raffles.

Letter from Thomas Raffles to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/190)

Liverpool
Nov 9. 1833.
My dear Mrs. Rawson,

I found your Letter, along
with many others, waiting my
arrival on my return from
Scotland (where I have recently
been in a missionary tour) the
latter end of last week: &
my purpose then was to do
my best to meet the wishes
it expressed. But on Monday[?]
last it pleased our Heavenly
Father to visit us with a
severe domestic affliction
at 5 in the morning of that
day, that fell disease the
Croup in its severest form,
seized our youngest Child,
and at noon he died --
the visitation has fallen
heavily upon us -- so that
I have been quite in capacitated
for any occupation similar
to that to which your letter
calls me: & now I find
myself so oppressed with
public & pastoral business
accumulated during my
late journey & present
domestic trial, that I
cannot direct my attention 
to any thing but ^that which is
worth[?] pressing[?] & imperative
in its claims. Indeed I 
never had any taste or
tact for that kind of writing
which your professed volume
requires. I have had the
misfortune it is true to scribble
to scribble a few lines of rhyme
but this has only ?
when the rhyme came --
I never invited it.
I never could com:
mand it -- & might sit the
whole day in vain endeavours
to string a few couplets together
on any subjects that should
be given to me for this purpose.
You must therefore place no
dependence upon me. If,
contrary to my expectations,
anything that I may have
the vanity to think suitable
should occur, in time, I will
send it
-- & if not -- I do
earnestly pray that my
Sin of omission may not
be deemed by you unpardon-
able!
Mrs R. joins me
in kind
regards to yourself
& worthy family,
and I remain
my dear Mrs. Rawson
Yrs very truly
bls
Th. Raffles

Letter from Eliza Conder to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/16)

 
My dear Madam,

Having, contrary to my
intention, omitted sending on immediate
acknowledgment of your polite and kind
note, I must beg you to accept with
my best thanks for its friendly contents,
my apologies for having thus delayed
them. It would afford me much pleasure
to enjoy a few hours of your society, and
I am not without hope of accomplishing
this purpose at some interval, before
my return.

A copy of your elegant volume
was sent into my hands by Mr. Conder
the evening before I left home.
In the prospect of parting from my
family, I had not much leisure of
mind, to consider its merits. Therefore,
contented myself with ascertaining satis-
factorily the two points on which, I believe,
all writers -- whether drinking at the
fountain head of Castaly, or sipping at its
remotest confluence with the waters
of oblivion -- will he found most sen-
sitive: -- What mistakes have the
printers made? and who are our companions?
Both questions were inexceptionable[?]
answered both for Mr. Conder's verses and
my own. Then, I felt obliged to close
the book, and can guess[?] at its further
character only only as it may be more
or less favourably received in the review.
The Critic seems to have possessed the
good taste and tact to transmute
the one disadvantage -- its late appear-
ance into a recommendation.

I cannot suppress a degree of agitation
in looking on the thickening shadows
of this evening, and thinking of
tomorrow dawn. -- feelings in which
you have feared, that you most
(deeply
deeply participate[?]. A day so full of
thrilling interest may not again wake
until the last sunrise shall appear.
I must offer my sincere thanks for
your very kind enquiries, and am thankful
to be able to say All is well.
My Sister unites with me
affectionate respects to Mrs. Reid, and
best regards to your whole family. She
begs also her kindest remembrance
to yourself. Believe me,

My dear Mrs Rawson
Your with affection and esteem
Eliza Conder

West Dan House
July 31st
1834.



Letter from Eliza and Josiah Conder to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/18)

 

Watford Field House
Dec 10th

My dear Mrs. Rawson,
 

It was most fully my
intention to reply to your last letter
by return of post. The difficulty,
however, which I felt in returning
any thing like a satisfactory answer,
induced delay in the first instance;
and in the interim, my thoughts and
feelings have been much absorbed;
our youngest boy having been confined
with measles, from which he has
most mercifully recovered; and the last
few days having been unexpectedly
passed away from home. Still the
uneasy thought has continually recurred,
that your letter remained unacknowledged.
I found that Mr. Conder considered it
no easier task than I myself did, to
decide on a title, and although I felt
certain
certain that Montgomery's West Indies
would supply more than one suitable
motto[?], I was yet unable to select two
lines, which might be so detached.
It would not have seemed kind to say
in reply to such a letter as yours: who[?] could
counsel and decide half so well as
Montgomery himself? although I [?]
much that you should think of
consulting any one else. Thus have I
vainly cogitated, under the painful sense
of keeping you in daily expectation
and the perpetually recurring[?] fear of not
being, at last, able to resolve that
expectation. Having just had another
conversation with Mr Conder, I am
not without hope that he may
be able to suggest something on which
you may decide. I shall therefore leave
the remaining page for him to fill more
worthily, after entreating your pardon for
this long delay, and answering you that
it has caused me much regret.
I beg to be remembered[?] with affectionate respect[?]
to Mr & Mrs Read, and love to your Sister.
May I be allowed also, to [?] a kiss for your
dear little Daughter.



Believe me, dear Madam
Yours sincerely and affectionately

Eliza Conder.
 


My dear Madam
 

I really feel, as Mrs Conder
has stated, quite at a loss what title to
suggest; but incline to think that "Eleutheria,
or the Negro's Memorial" would be the best of
those you have mentioned. I wish that my inven[-]
tion would supply a better. Those who would not
understand the Greek word (which is one that
occurs in the Greek Testt. repeatedly) would at
least understand the second title; & the two
together would imply both a retrospective & a
prospective view of the subject. I regret that
the volume was not brought out last spring, when
the public feeling was all alive to the subject;
but under existing circumstances, I hope that
the notes of hope & joy will be found pleasingly
blended with the sadder straws, so as to give
to the publication a chain & interest which
it could not have had before the legislative abo-
lition of Slavery. I hope that Montgomery has sounded
the trump of jubilee. I seem myself to have almost lost
the power of writing poetry, except at rare intervals, &
feel ashamed of my meagre contribution.
I suppose that you have seen a certain pamphlet
called Wages or the Whip. Could I send you a copy
free of expense, if you have it not? I beg to join
with Mrs Conder in kindest respects to Mr & Mrs Read
& the rest of your circle. I am, my dear Madam,


Yours very sincerely
Josiah Conder



Letter from James Montgomery to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/78)



Sheffield,
June 29 1833.

My dear friend
When I received your note I had pre-
pared a rough sketch of the enclosed narrative from
memorandums. Which had lain on my desk ever since
my promise (sometime about last Easter, I believe)
to furnish you with something in the course of a few
weeks for your Negro-emancipation Volume. I
will not pretend to explain why this was not duly done;
latterly, however, it has been neglected because I thought
you would abandon your project when the ministerial
plan of abolishing Slavery was made known. -- All
this week, except today, I have been much occupied
in other unavoidable business -- not my own, and
therefore I cannot charge myself with evading your
commission either from idleness or ^for personal interest.
Here it is, such as it is, my humble contribution to your
Volume! The matter I am sure is excellent; and of
the manner[?] you will be hard-hearted indeed if you
think worse than I do; but my pen, my head my
heart itself, is worn out on this, and almost every
other subject of intense interest which in times past
has engaged all ^my powers and affections. No matter --
I must not trouble you with my troubles; forgive me for
ever ???. If the narrative now sent does not satisfy
you as suitable for your publication, do not hesitate to reject it.


With kindest regards to all at Wincobank, I am truly your friend
J. Montgomery

XXX This is so late that I have no means of sending you this packet
except through the Post Office.

Perhaps the following new reading will suit the two last lines of the verse which you quote.
(or see the top of the page)

"What did it there, but to betray his thought,
-- The Man, that traffic'd in his fellow-man!"

"What did it there but to betray the thought
Of Him who traffic'd in his fellow-Man!



Letter from Eustace Carey to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/94)


London 3d. July 1834
My very dear friend,

I am obliged, greatly
obliged, by your welcome note & welcome
book; which indeed, come into my
hand but yesterday, which I trust
you will accept as the explanation of
my great delay in acknowledging them.
The book is exceedingly neat & has no fault
but the one you name, its bulkiness. Nei-
ther the eye nor the hand quite agree to the
size; but you would naturally feel de-
licate in withholding, or abridging the con-
tributions you had yourself procured, es-
pecially from quarters so valued as those
from which the principal articles are proceed-
ed. You will not feel disappointed, I am
sure, at some slight pecuniary sacrifice.
The public, even the religious portion of it,
are not quite so liberal or even just
to such designs as yours, as we might
anticipate. I think you might with the
utmost propriety have omitted to convey
a copy to the minor contributors such as
myself. In this you have been too liberal.
Your benevolent purpose must compensate
the toil & the loss. When we read your vol-
ume we shall all [???] & think of our dear
friend, who, after all her troubles, modestly
styled herself the 'Compiler'.
After long wonderings, we are now
finding a resting place at least for a short
time. We have this day enjoyed apart-
ments in Camberwell. Here we hope to a-
bide for a season, how long, is known
to Him who fixes the bounds ^of our habita-
tion! Mrs Carey feels truly obliged by
your kind overture to her, & designs
to give expression to her own feelings in
a few separate lines to your dear Ma[???]
Our beloved Anne is fast improving.
She has been upon the very verge of the
grave. But God has been merciful to
her & to me. She har a sweet parent in
Mrs Carey. I think she will send
a line to her beloved friend, Elizabeth.
Our united[?] love to her & a kiss. Allow
me to beg my affectionate respects to every
one within your endeared circle, & to sub-
scribe myself,


My dear Madam,
Yours, Truly & affectionately

Eustace Carey



Letter from J. W. H. Pritchard to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/67)



My Dear Madam
I am much obliged
for the sight of the proof-
sheet, & think with you
that the Title of the verses
would hardly be complete
without the addition you
mention. I know of nothing
better than what you have
expressed -- "The Aged Slave
on finding that the period
fixed for complete eman-
cipation was too distant
for him to expect to live
to participate in its benefits."
As to the transposition
of the words "son" & "child"?
if you think it would be
better to make the alteration
I shall feel certain that it
will be an improvement.
I am persuaded that in
reading verses if on first
looking at them anything
appears uncouth, misplaced,
or awkward, it ought to be
at once condemned[?] or corrected,
for we may read the same
words ever so often as not
to perceive the faults which
were glaring at first sight.
I have read over the whole
of the sheet, & see nothing
to correct unless, in the
last line but one of
page 289, the word not
should be placed before the
word cheaply. In one
slave the triumph of the
the cause was indeed
achieved cheaply at the
cost of £20 000 000 & it
may be that Mr Ely refers
to that: but when I finish
read it I thought it possible
another sense[?] meaning
might have been intended.
I have been frightened by
the weather from setting
off to-day, & therefore shall
not now leave until Satur-
day. I am sorry on account
of your Packet, but I had
fixed not to go if the weather
precluded the possibility
of deriving much advantage
from the journey. As it is
I shall be in Nottingham
on Monday.



I remain,
Dear Madam
Yours very faithfully

J. W. H. Pritchard



Letter from Thomas Fowell Buxton to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 415/117)


Dear Madam
I am almost ashamed to address you at all after my long apparent neglect of your kind Favour & of the beautiful Book you were so good as to send me. I need not say I have been interested in it & admire the Execution & putting together of it. The only part which disgrace it is my Letter & must say it makes a most contemptible figure among its far superior Neighbours -- I have been extremely engaged of late on a Subject of new Interest -- the state of the Natives in our Colonies & this must be my Excuse for my long Silence. I send you a Paper on the 1st of August I cannot refuse myself the pleasure of telling you though a purely private Interest, that my eldest Daughter is to be married on that Day -- which every thing therefore combines to render most memorable to me --

I am Dear Madam
Yr faithful Servt
T. F. Buxton
July 11, 1834



Letter from John Holland to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/88)


Sheffield Oct. 8th 1833

Madam ,

I am exceedingly concerned to have suffered[?]
so many days to elapse between the reception of your kind
letter by me and this reply, my apology must be the confession
of a hope only extinguished by the lines on the other page, that
I might have been able to have composed, at least a Sonnet
in commemoration of the more auspicious circumstances in which
the recent legislative enactment has placed the question of Slavery.
If you still think worth your favour, the little communication
which I have the pleasure of rendering so long ago, I thought that
it might not be unbecoming on my part, to enable you to append
to it, or place in its company some memento that the writer was not
insensible to the fact of the virtual, though in reality still prospective
abolition of Slavery under British authority. How imperfectly I
have succeeded in this aim, the lines on the first page will, I am
afraid afford but too clear evidence: whether or not therefore, they
may be thought worth your acceptance, on the group above mentioned,
must depend upon the view you take of the reason given, as compared
with the demerit of the lines themselves. One happy feature in the
theory of slavery, as now espoused is that however many old captives,
and many who are neither old nor ailing, will die without seeing the
day of actual emancipation, they will have the satisfaction of leaving
that to their children which themselves never possessed -- the heritage
of freedom -- and surely, it is not a light thing for us to say, that the
registers of the West Indies shall no more record the birth of a slave.



I remain, Madam,
yours, very truly & respectfully
Jno. Holland



Letter from William Knibb to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/58)


London June 11th 1826
My dear friend
I received with much pleasure
your letter this month and hasten[?] to reply.
The appropriation[?] of the 50 pounds so kindly
given by the friends to whom you refer
shall be after left to their [decision?] after
you have stated to them my proposal
I shall feel a pleasure in call g it by the
name of [?] Thompson, and I have
already engaged a young lady to take
charge of the School[?], hoping that should
I not be permitted to appropriate this
Sum, I shall not fail of assistance in a
cause in which the future welfare
both of Jamaica and of Africa
are so nearly associated
as I hope to have the pleasure of
a [?] [interview?] with the kind
donors [ere?] I leave for Jamaica I shall
not now enter more fully into
particulars. With the assistance
I could obtain from Jamaica I
[would?] like to [conduct?] such a School
as I desire to see established, including
the maintenance of a few rescued
Africans for 100 pounds per annum
and without any maintenance
for 40.
With much respect
I am
Yours very affy
William Knibb
[addressed:]
Ms M A Rawson



Letter from James Montgomery to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/81)


Sheffield
Jan 18 1834
My dear Friend
Would "Records of Slavery" be a
suitable title for D. Townley's article?
The sentence respecting Buxton certainly does
read awkwardly, but it is constructed lyity
-- at least according to many indifferent
precedents. After the word "Senate,"
you might omit the "and," place a semicolon
after the former word, and read thus
"Senate; where eventually, his great" &c. Then remember
to strike out a "eventually" in the last line
??? of the paragraph. -- In the "voice
from &c" I have ventured to restore the
verbal reading in the English Version of
our Saviour's most beautiful and tender
address, -- which, indeed, is more impressive
and expressive too, than the substituted
form of "me, ye who are weary," in which "me"
and "ye," followed by so many vowels, make
the reader almost whistle in pronouncing
them. I may probably trouble you to
enclose a few lines for me to Mr Townley
but I am so unwell, and so spiritless, that
that
I have hardly heart or stength to do anything right.


Kind regards to all at Wincobank
from their friend & yours J. Montgomery


Letter from James Montgomery to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/82)


My dear friend

Both your letter and its enclosure from Mrs Townley, were very welcome. The former indeed gave me a minute or two's trouble, by imposing a task, though as light as the least feather that fell from the wing of Noah's Dove while she was flying over the waters without a shore, or where she was plucking the leaf from the olive just emerging above them; -- yet, after murmuring a little between my lips (my heart all the while reproaching me) I cast about in my mind for a thought, and having caught one caged it till this morning -- being interrupted at the time, and finding no spirit in the interval to meddle with plumage so delicate that I was afraid to touch it, lest like a butterfly's it should all come off upon my fingers, and I should have the mortification to send you a soiled and mutilated specimen for your repository of things "most good, most fair," of the kind, -- as I hope all, except my contributions, will prove to be. I was almost tempted to congratulate myself on some measure of success, in this instance, when, turning to your letter, I am deservedly (no doubt) for my vanity, humbled to find that you are to have an engraved vignette for your title-page, which will probably exclude a motto[?] so long as that which I have endeavoured to furnish. This would not have been too long, though consisting of twelve lines, if printed in the small but exquisite and distinct type, frequently used for such occasions. The lines, however, are written, and I may as well send them, leaving you to do what you please with them. If unsuitable for the frontispiece, they may perhaps be put into a corner towards the latter end, -- if the Book is ever to have arrived! Surely it will appear before the 1st of August, in spite of printers and engravers, who are by practice most accomplished procrastinators. I have been interrupted, as usual, here, and shall reconsider the subject of a motto before I take up my pen again -- this day's post being lost; but that will be so much time gained for an idler like me. XXX Perhaps the following from Milton would be a motto sufficiently significant, in connection with the phrase of the second title, "the Negro's Memorial," which is itself a comment on the first figurative one, "The Bow in the Cloud."

 
He, with uplifted lands, and eyes devout,

Grateful to heaven, over his head beholds

A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow,

Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,

Betokening peace from God, and covenant new.

Paradise Lost, Book XI.

 
You will find these lines, with further allusions to the rainbow (but these I think are decidedly most appropriate for your purpose) at the close of the eleventh Book of Paradise Lost. My opinion of their peculiar appropriateness for your title-page, is founded upon the circumstance of their application being general "betokening peace, and covenant new," whereas in the context, though each of the allusions is exceedingly beautiful yet immediate reference is made to the deluge, and the promise that no second destruction of the earth by a flood should ever ensue. After reading this passage in Milton, I am almost ashamed of my own puny[?] lines, and my weakness in having confessed that I was somewhat pleased with them, when I had first embodied the thought in readable verse. Do what you please will with them; and in everything that concerns this darling volume of yours, freely command any service which you think I can render. With sincere regards to Mr & Mrs Read and the rest of my Wincobank acquaintances

I am, very truly your friend & Servt

J Montgomery

Sheffd. March 22, 1834

 
The Rainbow For the first of August 1834


Sign of the passing storm,

Symbol of wrath gone by,
Born of the cloud and sun, -- what form

Of Beauty tracks the sky?

From Afric to the isles of slaves,

The Rainbow spans the Atlantic waves.

* *

Black, white, and bond and free,

Castes and proscriptions cease;

The Negro wakes to liberty,

The Negro sleeps in peace;

Read the great charter on his brow,

"I am a Man, a Brother, now."

 
J. Montgomery.

I have put a head to these stanzas, on the supposition that you will not use them as a motto. If you do, of course, the head all be unnecessary.


Letter from Thomas Burchell to Mary Anne Rawson (English MS 414/103)


London Nov 19th 1833
Respected Madam
Yours of the 6th inst I received
a few days since, requesting the communication of
one or two facts respecting the Negroes in the Island of
Jamaica - - I certainly feel considerable difficulty in
writing a narrative of facts without having some speci-
fic object in being, or some subject to illustrate -- how-
ever I will give you the bare relation of two or three inci-
dents which came under my observation & if you consi-
der them worthy of a place in your contemplated vo-
lume, you are at liberty to make what use of them you
please. Perhaps it will be best for you to take the facts
& clothe them with your own language so as to promote
your own purpose & designs & make them suitable for such
abolume.
— You "wish for some fact shewing the readi-
ness with which Slaves will work for even a small remu-
neration" -- On this subject you may obtain important
information in the Evidence of Mr. Taylor contained in the
Parliamentary Report of the select Comte for the Extinc-
tion of Slavery -– The following incident also is direct to
the point & fully proves the disposition of the Slaves to
labour if they are fairly remunerated -- Wishing to
widen & improve a road[?] from the highway to my residence
which was up a steep & difficult ascent & indeed scarcely
passable, I applied to a Master of a jobbing gang & re-
quested him to inform me the lowest terms for which
he would undertake the work; after several interviews
& discussions, he offered to perform it for the sum of £32
I am requiring[?] prompt payment -- Considering this amount
too high, & it being more than I cd afford I was induced
to pursue another plan –- Accordingly one day I took
a Slave, who was Driver of a jobbing gang, & after explain
ing the nature & difficulties of the work, proposed the fol
lowing question -- Supposing I was to hire of Your Master
12 Negroes, & if instead of working there before the while,
I gave each one a fippenny* per day besides paying the
Master**, how many days wd they require to complete the work?
The negro proceeded to examine the nature of the work, when
after some time he return'd & replied that if thus rewarded
they wd do it in 10 days or 11 at the fastest -- Upon this
information I applied to the Master, & hired the Slaves,
who were sent to me on the following Monday -- Before however
appointing them their work, I call'd them together & address'd
them in the following manner -- I have hired you of your
master to perform certain work -- I shall not allow the whip to be
used or carried by the Driver, but if you turn out early in the
morning, & work well during the day, I will give each a fippenny
for himself -- if any one is late to his work, or indolent in
his work, I'll not give him any thing, but will send him home
& obtain another slave in his stead -- When I had thus spoken
one of the Negroes with much good-humour replied, "Massa
no you talk abt sending we home, give we de hammer &
make we go, work" -- They proceeded, & I never recollect to
have seen any persons work better or more cheerfully -- Fre-
* Fippenny - is a piece of money current in Jama
** The Amt. charged by the Master for the hire of each Negro was
26[?] [?] per day
quently when I went to see how they were getting on, they wd
indulge in these jokes -- "Massa you no send we home yet"! Refer
ing to my address to them - one morng I went down abt past
5 o'clock, they have been at work abt an hour, when with
much good humour they said -- "Massa, no you say, if Neger
no turn out soon you send him home? Maybe no use, him
no know when Neger come" -- And at another time as they
were breaking the stone for the road, one remark'd - "Massa
dat fippenny, -- him make de stone break! If de hammer
only fall upon de stone, him break ^all to pieces" I had not
occasion to withold the promised reward from one, or in
deed to find fault with one -- & such was the influence which
this small sum had upon them that they completed the
work within the specified time, so that it cost me but
Should you think proper
£13.15 -- instead of £32 -- -- Should you think proper
to make any use of this fact, you will please not to publish
my name, but acknowledge it as the communication of an
Individual who was for several years a Resident in Jama --
I make this request because it is likely I shall soon be re
turning to the Island, & of course I am desirous not to occa
sion More ill will against myself than at present exists: --
for the same reason I think it undesireable to relate the
case of the Negress to whom you refer, as I cd not state that
without severely reflecting upon the Master. And as that fact
& the parties wd be at once recognized & as I shall have to come
into frequent contact with some of the persons concern'd, it
may do me much injury --    Respecting the for
giving disposition of the Negroes the following circumstance
will afford convincing demonstration -- You are aware of
my arrest & imprisonment, as well as that of other Mis-
sionaries during the sanguinary persecutions of 1831–2 --
The cruel sufferings inflicted upon many of the Christian Ne
groes during that period for their attachment to the Redeem
er & his cause can never be fully related; so that had they
given vent to their feelings by the most indignant expressions
it could not have excited our surprise; but so far from this,
I do not remember to have heard one Christn Slave during the
whole of those cruel persecutions indulge in a vindictive
term towards any of their malignant oppressors -- & the day
of my liberation from incarceration, on my arrival at
my lodgings, crowds of my afflicted friends throng'd to
see me, giving vent to their feelings by their many tears, & their
kindly expressions of sympathy on account of my suffer
ings & congratulations for my triumph over my better
foes who were thristing for my blood -- Amongst many
other interesting remains one poor Christn Negro address is
me in the following manner. "Massa" said he "You
feel too bad. -- We Enemy, -- dem wicked, -- dem bad for true;
Massa's dem take we Neger Negor, -- dem shoot we, -- den hang
we -- dem flog we -- dem pill *1 we blood, as tho' we no worth *2 at
all
-- but Minister we must pray for dem. Dem very
bad -- dem very wicked -- but -- Dem no convert yet"!!! A
noble apology made by one of those despised Slaves on be
half of those cruel men, & which cannot but remind us
of the spirit & prayer of the blessed Redeemer upon the
Cross "Father forgive them for they know not what they
do" -- they are not converted yet --
I must however conclude, as I fear you will con
sider me negligent for not having replied earlier, tho'
I have only received your Letter a few days; and my  [rest is missing]
* 1. They spill our blood
* 2. As tho' we were of no value at all

HM did not mark this passages in his copy of Mosses from an Old Manse. This is the final line from "The Artist of the Beautiful, on which Melville left marginalia on four pages. Melville mistakenly capitalized "artist" and switched tenses in copying the sentence -- "When the artist rose enough to achieve the Beautiful, the symbol by which he made it perceptible to mortal senses became of little value in his eyes, while his spirit possessed itself in the enjoyment of the reality" (p. 191 in HM's 1846 Wiley &amp; Putnam edition).